README.md, before:

# Data Readiness for Natural Language Processing

This document concerns data readiness in the context of machine learning and Natural Language Processing. It describes 
how an organization may proceed to identify, make available, validate, and prepare data to facilitate automated 
analysis methods. The contents of the document is based on the practical challenges and frequently asked questions we 
(NLU group at [RISE](https://ri.se)) have encountered in our work as an applied research institute with helping 
organizations and companies, both in the  public and private sectors, to use data in their business processes.


The purpose of this document is to describe how an organization may proceed to identify, make available, validate, and prepare 
data to facilitate automated analysis methods (machine learning, natural language processing).

## Read the documentation here

* Click [here](https://nlp-data-readiness.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for the latest working version at Read the Docs.
* Click [here](docs/README.md) for the latest working version at GitHub.
* Click [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.02043) for the arXiv (PDF) version of the document (September 4, 2020, revised September 30, 2020).


## How to contribute

The NLP data readiness document is work-in-progress. If you have any questions, suggestions for edits, or other input, 
please email the author (**fredrik.olsson AT-SIGN ri.se**) or submit a pull request in the document's GitHub repository, available at: 
[https://github.com/fredriko/nlp-data-readiness](https://github.com/fredriko/nlp-data-readiness).

General step-by-step instructions for how to contribute to create a pull request is descibed by, e.g, 
[Step-by-step guide to contributing on GitHub](https://www.dataschool.io/how-to-contribute-on-github/).

## How to cite 

BibTex:

```
@article{olsson2020data,
  title={Data Readiness for Natural Language Processing},
  author={Olsson, Fredrik and Sahlgren, Magnus},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.02043},
  year={2020}
}
```

Commit message:

Updated information with references to new pre-print.

README.md, after:

# Data Readiness for Natural Language Processing

This document concerns **data readiness** in the context of machine learning and **Natural Language Processing**. It describes 
how an organization may proceed to identify, make available, validate, and prepare data to facilitate automated 
analysis methods. 

The contents of the document is based on the practical challenges and frequently asked questions we 
(NLU group at [RISE](https://ri.se)) have encountered in our work as an applied research institute with helping 
organizations and companies, both in the  public and private sectors, to use data in their business processes.

The purpose of this document is to describe how an organization may proceed to identify, make available, validate, and prepare 
data to facilitate automated analysis methods (machine learning, natural language processing).

## Read the documentation here

* Click [here](https://nlp-data-readiness.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for the latest working version at Read the Docs.
* Click [here](docs/README.md) for the latest working version at GitHub.


### Pre-print papers
* [Data Readiness for Natural Language Processing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.02043), Olsson & Sahlgren, 2020.
* [We Need to Talk About Data: The Importance of Data Readiness in Natural Language Processing](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.05464), Olsson & Sahlgren, 2021.


## How to contribute

The NLP data readiness document is work-in-progress. If you have any questions, suggestions for edits, or other input, 
please email the author (**fredrik.olsson AT-SIGN gavagai.io**) or submit a pull request in the document's GitHub repository, available at: 
[https://github.com/fredriko/nlp-data-readiness](https://github.com/fredriko/nlp-data-readiness).

General step-by-step instructions for how to contribute to create a pull request is descibed by, e.g, 
[Step-by-step guide to contributing on GitHub](https://www.dataschool.io/how-to-contribute-on-github/).
